---
title: "Social Dilemma"
date: 2020-10-28T14:44:49+02:00
draft: false
toc: false
images: 
tags: 
  - social media
  - exploration
  - check in with yourself
  - addictive loop
 
---

A man just woke up from 50 years of hibernation. How could you describe to him what has changed in the world? We carry a device in our pocket which can access almost all the knowledge of mankind, yet we use it mainly to share cat photos.
Sure sending & receiving feline pictures could be fun.
Let me ask you a question:
Would you allow an invention to be legal which would kill 1,35 million people annually but raise the average life quality for the majority?                                         (actual road traffic deaths by WHO)

The above point to an interesting layer of our technology usage: it can’t be judged without examining the underlying motivation and usage patterns meaning what, when & how it is being used. It is indeed a miracle what could we achieve at our fingertips, but just like with any other tool, it could be abused as well.
 
May I ask you how much time do you spend on social media?
(do you dare to check it on your phone now?)
Why are you using it?

Have you ever logged in with a particular task in your mind and forgotten it and just scrolled through random material, selected by an AI to get your attention?
Since the very design of social media meant to be addictive, it’s quite easy to fall for their dopamine boosting design mechanism. Being a prisoner of an addictive loop could be viewed as mindless just the opposite of being mindful. How about claiming back your freedom? Let’s balance something with an addictive potential with its possible antidote counterpart.
After watching social dilemma and reading through their recommendations for developing a healthier relationship with social media technologies, namely: 

1. Turn off ALL notifications;
2. It’s nice to take a day off from technology on a weekly basis;
3. Never chose a recommended video, always chose YOURSELF;
4. Install extensions that remove recommendations (to avoid falling into the rabbit hole on Youtube);
5. Before you share, fact check, check the source, do that extra work;
6. Make sure to get all kinds of different information, in your own life;
7. Follow people that you disagree with;
8. No social media for young kids;
9. How much time do you WANT to spend on social media? Respect that.
10. If you can, delete your accounts. That way, we might have a few people ready to create a societal conversation that is not manipulated by the minds of the Silicon Valley. 

 I realized that something I find very important is missing from the list and I should share with you an exercise I have designed when preparing my thesis.
I advised them to do a one minute meditation before logging into a particular social media site, like check in yourself before check into a social media platform: Furthermore you could continue exploring yourself during & after the usage of that social media.
„Gently observe & approach yourself with a curious attitude e.g.: Can I allow myself an exercise of checking in with myself right now? How am I doing? How is my posture? My breath? Heartbeat? What bodily sensations Do I feel? Which emotions? What are my thoughts? What do I desire? What would I like to do at this moment?”
After logging in you may continue to observe your social media activity and your mind, body & soul.
After log out again you may checking in with yourself. Just allow yourself to perceive whatever present within you.
How am I doing? How is my posture? My breath? Heartbeat? What bodily sensations Do I have? Which emotions? What are my thoughts? What do I desire? What would I like to do in this moment
Remember, there is no right & wrong. Stay curious, open and keep exploring.

.”
